# AI-driven Automated Discovery Tools Reveal Diverse Behavioral Competencies of Biological Networks

This repository hosts the source code to reproduce the results presented in the paper [AI-driven Automated Discovery Tools Reveal Diverse Behavioral Competencies of Biological Networks](https://osf.io/s6thq/):

- Paper: [docs](https://developmentalsystems.org/curious-exploration-of-grn-competencies/index.html), [notebook](notebooks/paper.ipynb)
- Tutorial 1: [docs](https://developmentalsystems.org/curious-exploration-of-grn-competencies/tuto1.html), [notebook](notebooks/tuto1.ipynb)
- Tutorial 2: [docs](https://developmentalsystems.org/curious-exploration-of-grn-competencies/tuto2.html), [notebook](notebooks/tuto2.ipynb)



## Running the notebooks

Clone the repository on your local machine 
```sh
git clone https://github.com/flowersteam/curious-exploration-of-grn-competencies.git
```
The code comes with an anacoda environment that has all the requirements pre-installed.
You can create the environment using 

```sh
conda env create -f env.yaml # creating the environment
```
Then you can activate the environment and visualise the paper and the tutorials using the jupyter lab
```sh
conda activate curious_assistant
jupyter lab
```
The paper and tutorials are written in the form of jupyter notebooks and are placed in the `notebooks` folder. The complete structure of the repository is as follows: 
```sh
├── README.md
├── LICENSE
├── env.yaml                        # anaconda environment
│
├── notebook_to_html_export.ipynb   # notebook generating the docs
├── docs                            # generated docs html
│
├── experimental_campaign           # data and code for the experiments
│
└── notebooks                       # jupyter notebooks
   ├── figures
   ├── paper.ipynb                  # paper notebook
   ├── tuto1.ipynb                  # tutorial 1 notebook
   └── tuto2.ipynb                  # tutorial 2 notebook
```   
 

### Reproduce the paper results

Before trying to regenerate the paper plots please unzip the `experiment_data_statistics.zip` and `evaluation_data_examples.zip` files in the `experimental_campaign/analysis/` folder.

Then you can just run the `paper.ipynb` notebook. 

**Notice**: The paper notebook loads data that was generated by the tutorials as well as by the experimental campaign.
In order to re-generate these data from scratch, one can run the tutorials with the `nb_save_figs=True` option as well as re-run the full experimental campaign as detailed below.

### Running the tutorials
As some of the tutorial cells might take considerable amount of time to execute the tutorial notebooks come with an option to load already executed data, which is much faster. This functionality can be used as a initiation to the tutorials, when running them for the first time.

```python
nb_mode = "load" #@param ["run", "load"]
```
If you want to regenerate all the data and run the tutorial examples set the `nb_mode` to
```python
nb_mode = "run" #@param ["run", "load"]
```
### Running the experimental campaign

**Notice**: can take a lot of space

#### Database creation
The database of biological networks used in the paper is contained in the `experimental_campaign/resources/` folder. 

You can delete the `experimental_campaign/resources/bio_models` folder as well as all the `experimental_campaign/resources/*.csv` files and regenerate them as follows:


```python
python run_bio_models_preselection.py
python run_bio_models_nodes_selection.py
```

The database of random networks as well as the analysis of their versatility (Figure 7 of the main paper) can also be reproduced by deleting the  `random_networks_versatility.npy` file and regenerating it as follows:

```python
python generate_random_models.py
```

#### Running curiosity-driven exploration and robustness tests

#### Running random exploration baseline

#### Gathering data

## Contact 
If you have any questions about the notebooks or the paper feel free to contact me at the email: mayalen.etcheverry@inria.fr
